is going to be a video that a hope helps
explain a little bit of how caster works
to recenter your steering and how
lifting a Jeep or a vehicle affects a
caster so let's get started with a
couple terms I'm gonna use in the video
they're just going to be simple terms am
I going to make this any more
complicated it needs to be this is going
to be the vertical plane it's the point
at which the tire contacts the ground is
the tire-contact patch it's a vertical
line that runs straight through the
middle of your wheel straight to the
middle your tire vertical it's
perpendicular to the ground all right
the second term is going to be the
steering axis the steering axis is
represented by this white tape here on
the tire it is the lower ball joint and
the upper ball joint if you drew a line
through those two that is your steering
axis that is the point which your
steering pivots and this is highly
exaggerated just for the video purpose
to show you how the caster angle is
affected as you lift and how it affects
your steering alright like I said caster
angle is what we're talking about today
so the angle between the tire-contact
patch and the steering axis here to here
that is your caster angle a positive
caster angle is going to have a more
leading bottom and the top is going to
be trailing which means the top is going
to be further back that is positive
caster if it was complete opposite that
would be negative caster and if it was
directly in line with the tire-contact
patch that would be zero degrees caster
from the factory this is a Jeep JK so it
has roughly four degrees positive caster
now once you lift this vehicle whether
its Springs or pucks if you're
increasing the space between the top of
the axle and the bottom of the frame you
are essentially forcing the lower
control arm to go down and
once this happens the steering axis is
tilted in its turn closer to the
tire-contact patch as you see here so as
you lift the further you lift the more
the the axle is rotated forward and that
steering axis becomes more vertical and
you lose positive caster so why is this
important well caster is used to
recenter the wheel after turn and it
helps it maintain true driving while
everyone down the down the road and it
does this by the different the length
between the steering axis and the
tire-contact patch so at this point
right here like I said is where your
steering pivots so we can use this pin
as a representation this is a we're
going to say for this experiment this is
4 degrees positive caster all right so
the link between here and here is what
it is from the factory so as you turn
you're going to pivot here and the
tire-contact patch swings out well since
the tire-contact patch swings out here
you're having forces that are pushing
against it via friction that pushes
against it here and it forces this tire
to go back to centre
alright so as you lift the vehicle and
you lessen the amount of positive caster
now you just pin top because it's the
difference in the distance between the
tire-contact patch and the steering axis
so now you only have this much
separation between the two as it kicks
out it requires more force to push the
same tire back to Center
well you haven't increased the friction
on the road the friction is the same so
your tire is less likely to return to
center with this little amount of a
mechanical advantage here so what you
need to do is you need to lengthen the
lower control arm shortly upper control
arm or a variation of both and this is
going to give you the positive caster
that you need once again
the steering axis is here the tire
rotates out your vertical plane is at
the end of the pin therefore you have
the mechanical advantage to push back in
with less caster closer to the vertical
plane you have less mechanical advantage
therefore the tire does not return to
center and you get it wandering or
flighty feeling as you are at in the
road
I hope this helps explain to some people
that were a little unclear on it have a
good day